# CS-465
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN <br /><br />

<b><i>Architecture</b></i><br />
<i>Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).</i><br />
The frontend devellopment types were similar but also vastly different. They all used some level of static HTML and CSS. Express development and the SPA were even more similar than the sattic HTML or just JavaScript development. Express and the SPA both dynamically built the pages based on the content needed. They went about it far differently. In Express, there were many pages that shared common elements and repeated content. The header was a great example of this, as well as the footer, and any page with lists had repeat content because all of the items in the lists had the same layout. Express used the database to supply the data, handlebars to supply the format, and loops where needed to populate the page. This made loading pages easier and editing common elements easier as well. For example, editing the header or navbar on an entirely static HTML page site would involve editing the heaer or navbar on every HTML file where those elements are present. On a site with a lot of pages, this can be dozens of edits every time you need to do something simple. In Express, you edit the header handlebar and that's it, it loads from that single file every time you run a page load. This is still in the realm of multiple pages, though, and that is where the big difference with the SPA comes in. The SPA only loads a page once. All of the HTML and CSS and images are downloaded on the first page load. Then, sections of the page are rewritten as the user navigates the page.  This use a router just the Express, but instead of loading new pages, pieces are loaded usign database API calls. This makes navigation faster and smoother and reduces server load.<br />
<i>Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?</i><br />
We used a MongoDB for a few reasons. One is that the schema is not essential and when we used it we were able to set flexible parameters. We were also able to index based on a few of those parameters while creating our own simple schema. The major reason for the MongoDB instead of the SQL database is that MongoDB uses JavaScript, which fits directly in with the rest of the MEAN stack. This enabled us to code in JavaScript on the database, back end, and front end. MongoDB is also fast to set up, easy to host, and has easy integration with the rest of the MEAN stack. In this app, for example, we had calls to trips that said db.trips.find({}) which returned all of the trips instead of the longer SQL command which would have been SELECT * FROM trips or for the individual trip SELECT * FROM trips WHERE code IS $code. Instead we were able to use db.trips.find({"code": "$code"}). This syntax fits well into the MEAN stack syntax for everythign else and is easier to manage overall. <br /><br />

<b><i>Functionality</b></i><br />
<i>How is JSON different from JavaScript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?</i><br />
JSON is JavaScript Object Notation. It breaks objects up into key/value pairs. It is different because you can't actually do things in JSON. It holds data in a usable and readable format for easy use by JavaScript. JSON ties togehter with frontend development because the frontend uses JavaScript objects to hold JSON data and then do things with it. For example, in this project there were trips. The trips all had information like an image name, trip name, description, etc. This was transmitted to the frontend in JSON. The frontend converted those to JavaScript objects called trips and then used the properties (trip.name, trip.image, trip.description, etc.) to populate HTML fields and display data for the end user. JSON relates to the backend in a similar fashion, especially since we used MongoDB. MongoDB stores objects in BSON, which is very similar to JSON, and converts well. The frontend can send JSON data to the he MongoDB calls and create, update, or delete records. It can also send JSON to a read function to display information. The backend uses the JSON to make the database calls and responses. <br />
<i>Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.</i><br />
At first, the trips page was static HTML. Then it was refactored to use handlebars and static JSON data without involving the database. This improved the user interface development because now we only had one set of HTML to work with for a whole list. Instead of about 5 or 6 lines of HTML code per trip item, we now had 5 or 6 that covered all of the trip items. This was accomplised by adding a {{#each trips}} and {{/each}} tag before and after the HTML block and then manipulating how the HTML worked. This reduces potential for error as well. If you're copy/pasting many lines of HTML for adding new trips, it can be easy to miss an edit like the a href tag to the right trip. Using the handlebars and the static data improved this. Then, we refactored again to use the database. This made things even more efficient because then we could make an easy create and aedit function and control how the data is managed to leave little room for error on the user's part. Reusable UI components are a big help because they make your code less cluttered, they reduce the time you need to spend manually coding everything, and they reduce error because they reduce redundant code. <br /><br />

<b><i>Testing</b></i><br />
<i>Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.</i><br />
Testing methods, in our experience in this project, were primarily console log messages, status codes, and actually running the tests with mock data via postman or via the actual site. The status code would clue us in on where the issue was encountered, and console log messages would help to find a specific point in the code that was the problem. For example, I had several console log messages on the login function to find out there was a bug in my code at the setPassword funciton. I added a log at each step of the login process and saw that the password okay log never appeared. This helped me zero in on the problem and correct it. API methods, as I understand them, are GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE. These are fascilitated by HTML operations. The GET issues a read call to the database. The POST issues a create call to the database. The PUT issues an edit call to the dtabase. And the DELETE issues a delete call to the database. Security of the  endpoints will be paramound in full stack development. In our applicaiton, we wrapped the sensitive ones (POST and PUT) in a check to see if the user was logged in. That's all well and good, but we didn't protect the ability to register, so anyone could register and then POST or PUT. This will have to be addressed in future versions of the site. Security is a big component of modern web projects and needs to be carefully thought out. <br /><br />

<b><i>Reflection</b></i><br />
<i>How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?</i><br />
This course has taught me a lot about development. It is very similar to SQL and full stack development using .NET. It is interesting to see the different approaches as well as how similar they can be. This course helped me to obtain a deeper understanding of how the MVC model works, how the database is integrated into websites, and hwo to use JavaScript. The Angular component and API component really taught me about how to leverage the fact that pages have a lot of static content that does not change page to page and how to use that to your benefit. I have learned how services and routers work in the code and I think that will be very helpful in my career. I also learned quite a lot about APIs and security, and those are in high demand out there. I wasn't really sure what the benefit of an API was before taking this class, and now I can see how helpful they would be, especially when connecting to other internet services or devices. <br />
